



None                                                             S. Celi
Internet-Draft                                                     Brave
Intended status: Informational                                 J. Guerra
Expires: 4 March 2024                                                   
                                                               M. Knodel
                                                                     CDT
                                                        1 September 2023


            Intimate Partner Violence Digital Considerations
                      draft-ietf-celi-ipvc-latest

Abstract

   This document aims to inform how Internet protocols and their
   implementations might better mitigate technical attacks at the user
   endpoint by describing technology-based practices to perpetrate
   intimate partner violence (IPV).  IPV is a pervasive reality that is
   not limited to, but can be exacerbated with, the usage of technology.
   The IPV context enables the attacker to access one, some or all of:
   devices, local networks, authentication mechanisms, identity
   information, and accounts.  These kinds of technical compromise exist
   in addition to on-path attacks, both active and passive [RFC7624].
   In this document we describe the tactics the IPV attacker uses and
   what kind of counter-measures can be designed in IETF protocols.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/claucece/draft-celi-ipvc.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 4 March 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Definition of technology-based IPV
     2.1.  Terminology
   3.  Technology-based IPV attacks
     3.1.  The intimate attacker
     3.2.  Tech-based IPV tactics
     3.3.  Kinds of tech-enabled IPV attacks
     3.4.  Means of attacking
   4.  Specific abused technology
   5.  Recommendations
   6.  Resources
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Intimate partner violence (IPV) refers to physical, emotional,
   verbal, sexual, or economic abuse of a person by a current or former
   intimate partner (henceforth, refered to as the attacker or
   abuser).[WHO] It is understood that in IPV cases there is an unequal
   power relationship that enables the abuser to cause harm in romantic
   or sexual relationships, as well as child or elder abuse, or abuse by
   any member of a household.

   Digital technologies are central in modern lives and can be used as a
   way to enable and enhance IPV.  Technology-based IPV has impact on
   the physical, psychological and emotional health of survivors,
   affecting them not only individually but their social environment
   [ref].

   There is significant existing work in the field of online gender
   based violence [IPVTechBib][CSP] and technology-based IPV [Freed]
   mainly focused on response and resiliency, including digital privacy
   and safety strategies.  Nevertheless, IPV is not considered enough
   when designing digital technologies, networks, or Internet protocols
   against threats.  Only in rare cases are protocol design or
   cybersecurity best practices/tactics available [CETAStrategies].

   The type of abuser that is close and familiar to the victim, "the
   attacker you know", is neither on- nor off-path, they have complete
   access to-- perhaps even share-- devices and local networks.  They
   can even coerce their targets.

   This document describes the tactics used in technology-based IPV.  It
   provides recommendations for the design of protocols and
   implementations to mitigate those tactics.  In what follows, we first
   describe IPV and related terminology, the kind of tactics attackers
   use, and we end with the recommendations.

   Although the category of tech abuse includes practices such as Child
   Sexual Abuse Material (CSAM), or digital manipulation of images and
   videos (deepfakes) to exhibit and slander women [Witness], those
   tactics are out of scope in this document, since the attacker is not
   part of the victim's social environment, i.e. they do not necessarily
   have access to the victim's local network.

2.  Definition of technology-based IPV

   Technology enables and enhances IPV attacks with pervasive
   surveillance, overt monitoring, and coercive access.  IPV refers to
   physical, emotional, verbal, sexual, or economic abuse of a person by
   a current or former intimate partner.  By "partner" we mean anyone
   with a close relationship with the victim that can exercise abuse in
   a romantic or sexual relationship, as well as child or elder abuse,
   or abuse by any member of a household.  In cases of IPV, there is an
   unequal power relationship that enables the attacker to cause harm.
   [Dragiewicz2018] calls this "digital coercive control" whereby
   Internet-enabled technology-- through access to local networks,
   devices and accounts-- becomes a mechanism to exert control, to
   conduct surveillance, or to aggravate and harass.

   Note that while this kind of abuse of technology is excerted to any
   person (regarless of their gender or sexuality), there is an
   interesection with gender violence.  As noted by [APCFramework],
   "women and girls face specific cyber threats in the digital age that
   are considered forms of gender-based violence as they occur because
   of their gender, or because they disproportionately affect one
   gender.  While this violence is mediated by digital technology, it is
   part of the same offline structural violence; but its technological
   dimension adds elements of search, persistence, replicability and
   scalability that facilitate the aggressors’ access to their targets
   and can exacerbate the harm."

2.1.  Terminology

   In the rest of this draft, we will use this terminology:

   *  Attacker: By "attacker" we mean a person, an abuser in an IPV
      situation that is using digital tools to enable and enhance abuse.
      An attacker can also be referred to as "perpetrator".

   *  Victim: By "victim" we mean a person who is subject or target of
      an attack.  Notice that we are using this term only in the
      temporary context of an attack scenario.  We prefer the term
      "survivor", which recognizes the agency and resistance tactics of
      those facing IPV, but for the purposes of this document we focus
      on the fact of being subject of specific technology-based IPV
      attacks.

3.  Technology-based IPV attacks

   In order to describe IPV attacks that are enabled or exacerbated by
   Internet technology, we first describe our assumptions about the
   attacker and common tactics that can be used.  Then, the types of
   technology-enabled IPV attacks are described.

3.1.  The intimate attacker

   The attacker we present in this document is one that either has
   forceful control of accounts, devices, and/or authentication
   information for accessing systems, or uses public information to
   exercise control.  This kind of attacker can be technologically savvy
   or not.  We define this attacker as one of the strongest ones as it
   can have unlimited access to systems and devices, whithout investing
   a lot of financial or computational resources.

   The attacker has some kind of physical access to the victim (or has
   had it in the past), and often shares a common social network with
   them.  In some cases, it can be the legal owner of the devices/
   accounts a victim uses.

3.2.  Tech-based IPV tactics

   There are many ways in which digital and networked technology can
   facilitate an attacker perpetrating IPV.  For an in-depth reading,
   see [TBMDGMMDR] and [CDOHPFLDMR].  Here we informally list their main
   groups:

   *  Ready-made tools: Attackers can use applications or devices that
      are solely built to facilitate IPV.  These apps are sometimes
      called "stalkerware" or "spouseware".

   *  Dual-use tools: Attackers can use applications, control settings
      or devices built for beneficial or innocuous purposes and
      repurpose them for harm.  This is the case, for example, of anti-
      theft devices that can be repurposed for stalking.

   *  Impersonation attacks: Knowing personal information coupled with
      access to authentication mechanisms gives an attacker the ability
      to fully authenticate to services and accounts of the victim,
      effectively impersonating them.  This can be executed to the
      degree that the victim can no longer successfully authenticate
      themselves.

   *  UI-bound impersonation attacks: Attackers can abuse technology to
      enhance IPV by abusing the UI of a specific tool.  In this case,
      attackers become authenticated but adversarial users of a system.
      They cannot, however, escalate to root privileges or access other
      underlying functionalities of the system.  They are bound to
      whatever system they managed to authenticate to.  We will explore
      later the ways attackers use to forcibly gain authentication to a
      system.

   *  Social media and forums: Attackers can learn and share information
      on how to use technology to enhance IPV through the usage of these
      tools.  They can also receive narrative justification to condone
      their behaviour.  They can also perform cyberstalking,
      cyberbullying, doxxing with the usage of these tools.

   *  Perception of threat: The mere presence of a pervasive threat is a
      form of control.  The perception that technology can be used to
      enhance IPV is a tactic of attackers to control victims, take away
      agency and abuse them.  This can lead to lack of trust in
      technology, and further isolates the victim from seeking and
      receiving support.

3.3.  Kinds of tech-enabled IPV attacks

   *  Monitoring: One of the most prevalent methods to enhance IPV is
      the usage of active monitoring of any online account that the
      victim has or of any action that the victim does in the digital
      world.  This includes a variety of behaviors that feel unwelcomed
      and intrusive, and can involve threats.  The monitoring is
      "active" in that is a permanent action that the victim can be
      aware of or not, and that the abuser might want to make them aware
      or not.  It can include:

      -  Monitoring e-mail, chat-based or social media communications,
         or browsing information (history, cookies or more) either
         directly on the victim's device or through specialised
         applications.

      -  Monitoring location and whereabouts by looking at the metadata
         of communication, by using location-help applications, or by
         using specialized applications.

      -  Monitoring any data sent over the network by mounting DNS
         attacks or other specialised attacks.

      -  Monitoring any information found on the UI by looking at
         devices screens while the victim is using them.

      -  Using the Internet to seek public or private information to
         compile a victim's personal information for use in harassment.

      In this type of attack, we see these dimensions:

      -  Monitoring of the content of communications either at the
         application layer or other layers.

      -  Monitoring of the UI content of application tools.

      -  Monitoring of location information.

   *  Compromise of accounts: An attacker may demand access to the
      victim's accounts to continuously monitor, control or restrict
      their online communications and activities.  In contrast to the
      previous point, rather than using "publicly available" tools the
      perpetrator demands access to tools and contents in order to
      reduce the "life space" or "space for action" that the victim-
      survivor may have to perform activities that do not involve the
      attacker.  Once an attacker has access to an online account, they
      can use that to:

      -  Delete data, which can be communication data, documents and
         more (any information s stored in the device).

      -  Have access to contacts such as friends, family or colleagues.

      -  Have access to communications, audio-video content, and any
         associated metadata.

      -  Lock out or change the authentication mechanisms that grant
         access to the account.

      -  Impersonate by using the victim's online identity to send
         false/forged messages to others or to purchase goods and
         services.

      -  Impersonate by using the victim's online identity to publicly
         post information that can be private or fake.

      -  Impersonate by using the victim's online or legal identity to
         sign victims up for services.

   *  Compromise of devices: This attack is similar to the above, but
      the attacker demands access to the victim's devices.  The goal is
      the same as the above but the result is more impactful as it
      restricts access to accounts that are accessed through the device.
      It can also prevent any connection to the Internet.  Once an
      attacker has access to the device, they can use it to:

      -  Phisically prevent the use of the device (the device can be
         used, for example, to call police services, which is restricted
         with this attack).

      -  Access contacts and data (media or messages) stored in it.

      -  Access to accounts and authentication mechanisms for other
         accounts (saved passwords or authenticator apps -2-factor
         authentication-, for example).

      -  Perform impersonation.

      -  Perform denial of access to the device, networks or the
         Internet in general.

      -  Destroy the device itself and any information stored in it.

      -  Impersonate by using the victim's online identity, as accessed
         through the device, to publicly post information that can be
         private or fake.

   *  Exposing of private information or media: This attack builds on
      top of other attacks.  Once an attacker has access to an account
      or device, they can use this access to gather private information
      or private media stored in it.  This can later be used for
      threatening, extortion, doxing (posting private information), and
      more.  It can also be used to gather information regarding bank
      accounts, tax information and more.

   *  Denial of access: This attack can be built on top of other
      attacks.  It can consist of denying access to a device, but also
      denying access to the Internet in general by destroying routers
      (or network devices), changing Wi-Fi passwords or network
      settings.  The goal is to disallow access to services, or contact
      with family and friends.  It can also take the form of disrupting
      digital communications by flooding a victim's communication tool
      with unwanted messages or by sending a virus program.

   *  Threats: This attack can be considered as a dimension of the
      previous attack as it can result on a denial of access attack.  It
      consists on sending e-mail, chat-based messages or social media
      messages that threatens, insults, or harasses a victim.

   *  Harrassing: Harrassment can be anonymous, but a victim often knows
      from whom harrassment messages/actions come from; but, due to its
      anonymity, it is unable to hold atackers accountable.  The systems
      we have in place often need that harrassment content is
      permanently available so that an investigation takes place.  This
      enhances the abuse a victim is suffering.  This type of attack
      appears in different dimensions:

      -  On-going harassment with the goal of intimidation, humiliation
         and monitoring.

      -  Harrassment that appears after a victim has [disconnected] to
         continue coercion.  When the abuser no longer has any physical
         control over the victim they can start to stalk them.

3.4.  Means of attacking

   The above attacks can be carried out in different ways.  We list here
   the most common ones:

   *  Installation of spyware or spoofing: This form of attack consists
      of installing unwanted tools into a device in order to gain access
      to accounts or for active monitoring.  It can also take the form
      of remote access by remotely "hacking" security questions,
      passwords or any authentication mechanism.  Most of the time,
      these tools are installed without the victim's knowledge.

   *  Coercion and control: This form of attack consists of using
      coercion and control (which can be physical, emotional or
      psychological) to gain access to devices, network devices,
      accounts or digital information.  It often takes the form of
      forcing victims to reveal passwords or account/devices
      authentication mechanisms.

   *  Shared network plans between family/relationship members: Often
      times, an attacker is the legal "owner" of a device (owning
      children's devices, for example) or accounts (a bank account, for
      example), or they have access to accounts/devices as they are part
      of a shared family plan.  This enables an attacker to carry out
      the previously mentioned attacks without the knowledge of the
      victim and without the need for installation of tools.

   *  Monitoring: This means of attack consists of the abuse of social
      media and any public information found on digital tools from the
      victim that has been shared through them.  It also involves
      installing tools for active monitoring on devices or using
      "benign" applications in a dual-use manner (applications, such as
      the "track my phone" one).

   *  Exposure: This means of attack consists of the abuse of social
      media to enhance harassment.  It consists of using social media to
      post harmful content to humiliate, to harass family or friends,
      for doxxing or to non-consensually share intimate/private media.

4.  Specific abused technology

   In the research of the ways attackers use technology to enhance IPV,
   we see this specific technology being abused:

   *  Passwords and authentication mechanisms: all authentication
      mechanisms can be used to enhance IPV as they are the single point
      of failure used by attackers to get access to the account and/or
      devices (and, once they have access to those, they can get further
      access to other accounts or devices).  Attackers can use
      specialised tools (to be installed in devices) to record
      authentication mechanisms, they can coerce victims in order to get
      access to devices, and more.  They can also mount these attacks
      against fingerprints and biometric authentication mechanisms,
      2-factor authentication devices/applications and more.

   *  Media and private information: attackers can use the access to
      accounts/devices to gain access to media and private information.
      This media can later be used to bribe a victim, to humiliate them
      (by publicly posting it), to enhance harassment and more.

   *  Recovery of account mechanisms: as with authentication mechanisms,
      attackers can use 2-factor authentication devices, accounts and/or
      applications to get access to other accounts or profiles

   *  Lack of blocking mechanisms and abuse of anonymous mechanisms:
      Often times attackers carry out abuse by:

      -  Contacting through fake numbers

      -  Contacting through fake accounts

      -  Sending messages to applications that have a "open" chanel for
         receiving any message.

      -  Abusing of read-recipes to enhance control.

      -  Abusing the lack of blocking mechanisms.

5.  Recommendations

   We list here some recommendations to protocol designers to mitigate
   technology-enabled IPV:

   *  Build proper authentication systems: authentication mechanisms
      should provide:

      -  A non-deletable and non-modifiable list of who has access to
         accounts/devices: a list of recognised devices and a list of
         active sessions.

      -  A way to recover access to an account and to change
         authentication mechanisms.

      -  Provide mechanisms to revoke access.

      -  Send clear notifications for:

         o  when new devices are used to access an account,

         o  when there is attempt to access an account,

         o  when any change has been made to an account.

      -  Provide mechanisms to approve access attempts to accounts
         (when, for example, a new device is trying to access an
         account).

   *  Storage and sharing of media: media should be stored/posted in
      such a way that:

      -  It can be taken down at the request of a victim if it consists
         of private media posted without consent.

      -  Provide good and private mechanisms for reporting the posting
         of non-consented media.

      -  Provide a way to destroy media once a device is in the hands of
         an attacker.

   *  Social media: social media can be a way for attackers to enhance
      monitoring.  They should:

      -  Provide proper blocking systems that are not limited to an
         individual account.

      -  Provide mechanisms by which only "accepted" people are able to
         send messages to an account.

   *  Browser history or searching information/metadata should be
      deleted by default.

   *  End-to-end encryption must be the default for any messaging in
      order to prevent network monitoring.

   *  Consider local attackers when designing sensitive applications.

   *  Engineer plausible deniability for sensitive applications.

   *  Build detection tools and improve logging and analytics for user
      agents and devices with IPV in mind.

   It is important to note that IPV should not be mistaken to be a
   privacy issue alone.  Furthermore any tech-based solutions and
   interventions that only address privacy can be used by attackers,
   helping them to cloak their attacks from the victim and other means
   of detection.  Power is imbalanced in IPV and technology entrenches
   power.[Citron]

6.  Resources

   *  Cornell Tech's Clinic to End Tech Abuse
      https://www.ceta.tech.cornell.edu/

   *  List of domestic violence hotlines around the world
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_domestic_violence_hotlines

   *  Procedures and tools for clinical computer security
      https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity19/presentation/
      havron

7.  Security Considerations

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

9.  Informative References

   [APCFramework]
              Communication, A. for P., "A framework for developing
              gender-reponsive cybersecurity policy", n.d.,
              <https://www.apc.org/sites/default/files/gender-
              cybersecurity-policy-litreview.pdf>.

   [CDOHPFLDMR]
              Chatterjee, R., Doerfler, P., Orgad, H., Havron, S.,
              Palmer, J., Freed, D., Levy, K., Dell, N., McCoy, D.,
              Ristenpart, T., and E. Tseng, "The Spyware Used in
              Intimate Partner Violence", n.d.,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8418618>.

   [CETAStrategies]
              Abuse, C. to E. T., "Resources from the Clinic to End Tech
              Abuse", n.d.,
              <https://www.ceta.tech.cornell.edu/resources>.

   [Citron]   Citron, D. K., "The Fight for Privacy: Protecting Dignity,
              Identity, and Love in the Digital Age", 2023,
              <https://wwnorton.com/books/9780393882315>.

   [CSP]      Abuse, C. to E. T., "Computer Security and Privacy for
              Survivors of Intimate Partner Violence", n.d.,
              <https://www.ipvtechresearch.org>.

   [Dragiewicz2018]
              Dragiewicz, M., Burgess, J., Matamoros-Fernández, A.,
              Salter, M., Suzor, N. P., Woodlock, D., and B. Harris,
              "Technology facilitated coercive control: domestic
              violence and the competing roles of digital media
              platforms", 6 September 2022,
              <https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
              abs/10.1080/14680777.2018.1447341>.

   [Freed]    Freed, D., Palmer, J., Minchala, D., Levy, K., Ristenpart,
              T., and N. Dell, "Technologies and Intimate Partner
              Violence: A Qualitative Analysis with Multiple
              Stakeholders", 2017, <https://doi.org/10.1145/3134681>.

   [IPVTechBib]
              Maynier, E., "Selected Research Papers on Technology used
              in Intimate Partner Violence", n.d.,
              <https://ipvtechbib.randhome.io/>.

   [NCAV]     Abuse, N. C. A. D. V., "National Statistics Domestic
              Violence", 6 September 2022,
              <https://ncadv.org/learn-more/statistics>.

   [RFC7624]  Barnes, R., Schneier, B., Jennings, C., Hardie, T.,
              Trammell, B., Huitema, C., and D. Borkmann,
              "Confidentiality in the Face of Pervasive Surveillance: A
              Threat Model and Problem Statement", RFC 7624,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7624, August 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7624>.

   [TBMDGMMDR]
              Tseng, E., Bellini, R., McDonald, N., Danos, M.,
              Greenstadt, R., McCoy, D., Dell, N., and T. Ristenpart,
              "The Tools and Tactics Used in Intimate Partner
              Surveillance: An Analysis of Online Infidelity Forums",
              n.d., <https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14341>.

   [WHO]      Organization, W. H., "Understanding and Addressing
              Violence Against Women: Intimate Partner Violence", 2012,
              <https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/77432/
              WHO_RHR_12.36_eng.pdf>.

   [Witness]  Gregory, S., "Deepfakes, misinformation and disinformation
              and authenticity infrastructure responses: Impacts on
              frontline witnessing, distant witnessing, and civic
              journalism", n.d., <https://journals.sagepub.com/
              doi/10.1177/14648849211060644>.

Acknowledgments

   Thanks to:

   *  Lana Ramjit and Thomas Ristenpart for their insipiring work on
      this area, and guidance for this draft.

   *  Shivan Kaul and Pete Snyder for discussions, guidance and support.

Authors' Addresses

   Sofia Celi
   Brave
   Email: cherenkov@riseup.net


   Juliana Guerra
   Email: juliana@usuarix.net


   Mallory Knodel
   CDT
   Email: mknodel@cdt.org
